(gentle electronic music)
(keyboard typing)
You might have heard
that there are no null pointer exceptions in Kotlin,
but that's not entirely true, as you'll see shortly.
However, Kotlin has been designed to make it difficult
to get a null pointer exception,
you pretty much have to go out of your way to get one.
Now I've already created
a new Kotlin project called NullReferences,
and I've added the usual package to it,
academy.learnprogramming.nullreferences,
and then I've added a file called NullReferences,
and all I'll do in addition to that
is add the main function as we usually do.
Now I've also created a
academy.learnprogramming.javacode package,
and I've added a NullReferences.java file to it
that just contains a class called NullReferences
and an empty main method.
Now in Java, we can assign a null to a variable.
We can do the following, String str = null,
and we don't get any errors, that's perfectly fine.
However, if we were to now do the following,
and then we were to run,
I'm sure you can guess what's going to happen.
We get the dreaded java.lang.NullPointerException.
So let's go back to the Kotlin file
and let's do the same thing we just did in Java.
So we'll say str, which is a String.
Actually, I'll start that with val str: String,
and we have to tell the compiler what type it is,
because we're gonna assign null,
and then we'll say = null.
And we get an error,
and the error is, null can not be a value
of a non-null type String.
So what does that mean?
Well, Kotlin has the notion of nullable types.
So if you want a variable to be able to contain null,
you have to explicitly tell the compiler that
by following the type name with a question mark, like so.
And now you'll see that the error goes away.
So we now have a variable that's nullable.
However, what we can do with this variable
is now restricted.
So let's assign a different value
and then call the toUpperCase function,
so we'll change, instead of null we'll say this isn't null,
and then we'll do what we did in Java
and call the toUpperCase function.
And you're gonna see that we get an error.
In fact, if we delete the toUpperCase,
and then we type in period
and we see what IntelliJ suggests to us,
we'll see that there's a whole bunch of stuff
that's now greyed out.
I mean we can't get the length,
all these toUpperCase functions, toLowerCase,
you know, LastIndex, tonnes of stuff is now greyed out,
we can't use it because we're using a variable
that's a nullable type.
So what are we gonna do here,
I mean we wanna uppercase this string
and apparently we can't.
Well, we can do what we do in Java,
we can say if str is not equal to null,
then uppercase it, and you'll see that all of a sudden
everything's available to us if I go back.
Everything's available to us,
because we've now checked for null.
So we can do that and it works.
Similar to smart casting,
the compiler remembers the null check.
Remember when you smart cast,
you actually check if an instance is something,
and then if it is, you can go ahead and use it here
as if it was, it's a variable of that type,
because the compiler remembers that you've already
verified the type, well, it's the same sort of thing here.
You check whether the string isn't null
and then in the following block of code,
the compiler remembers that you've done the null check
so then it goes ahead and lets you use it
as if it's a non nullable type,
even though it is a nullable type, as you can see here.
But as you can imagine,
the code could quickly become messy
if you have to have null checks all over the place,
as it does in Java.
As you know in Java, often there's just tonnes of code
checking for null, so it's all it's doing,
'cause we don't want the dreaded null pointer exception.
Kotlin obviously enforces that you do a null check,
so even if you're absolutely sure
that something's not gonna be null, if it can be null,
and you've declared it as a nullable type,
then you still have to check for null.
Now because Kotlin enforces it, and because Kotlin,
as we've seen many, many times at this point,
aims to be concise,
it has what's called the safe call operator.
If we hover the cursor over this line,
we'll see a suggestion from IntelliJ saying
replace the if expression with a safe access expression.
So what does that mean?
Well it means we can do the following,
instead of if string is not equal to null,
then do string uppercase, we can take this out,
and we can just go str?.,
and then if we look here,
we'll see everything's available to us.
And so we'll choose toUpperCase,
and that's a much more concise line of code,
and that's essentially shorthand for what we just did.
So with the question mark, we're saying this could be null.
So generate a null check under the covers.
And if that null check passes,
then call the toUpperCase method.
So it's essentially shorthand
for the code that we just wrote
that explicitly does the null check.
So if you've used a question mark after the data type,
then you need to use a question mark after the variable name
whenever you're trying to use it,
and you could get a null pointer exception if it's null.
Okay, so what happens if it is null?
I mean, right now we know it's not null,
so this is going to run fine,
but what will happen if it is null?
Well, let's try it out.
Let's change this to null.
And then here, I'm gonna change this line of code
to say, println,
what happens when we do this,
and we'll use a String template here,
and we'll just go str.toUpperCase.
Let's run this now.
And we'll see what happens when we do this, null.
But we don't get a null pointer exception.
In Java, when we called the toUpperCase,
we would have gotten a null pointer exception,
because this is null.
So, essentially what happens is,
when you have a safe operator expression like you do here,
if the variable is null, the expression evaluates to null.
If it isn't null, then the expression goes ahead
and runs and evaluates to
whatever it would normally evaluate to
when the variable isn't null.
So once again, this is shorthand for the following.
If str equals null,
then you wanna return null.
Otherwise,
we wanna toUpperCase it.
And you'll notice again that in here,
the compiler's smart enough to say,
oh, you've already checked for null,
we know in the else block of code
that it's not null, therefore I'm gonna let you go ahead
and just call the function
without having to use the safe operator.
So this is essentially what this boils down to,
this line of code here.
Now you might be wondering about the if,
and you're saying why is this even compiling,
why wouldn't it give us errors,
we're gonna cover the if in more detail in the next section,
so don't worry about that for now.
But this is what str?.toUpperCase is shorthand for.
It's saying if the string is null,
evaluate this to null, otherwise go ahead
and call the function.
So whenever you see the safe operator,
this is essentially what it's doing.
So in the beginning it's all gonna seem strange to you,
and it can be helpful to just, in your mind,
imagine this in the place of this.
Eventually, you know, you'll see this,
and it'll just be natural to you
and you won't even think about it,
but in the beginning, it can seem really strange
because when you use it, of course,
you're thinking, well, what's gonna happen if it's null?
So just keep this in mind,
this is essentially shorthand for this.
You can also use the safe operator
when you're accessing class properties
and we'll see examples of this later.
Okay, so let's go to the Java file for a minute
and I'm gonna type in some code that's not gonna compile
because I haven't defined the classes,
but imagine if you had this code.
If bankBranch
is not equal to null,
and then if it's not equal to null,
then you wanna get an address, so,
let's say bankBranch.getAddress,
and then if that's not equal to null,
then let's say you wanna get the country from the address,
address.getCountry.
And then maybe now you wanna do something with the country,
if it's not equal to null, you get the picture,
we see this all the time in Java code
because we're trying to avoid
that pesky null pointer exception,
so let's say maybe here we'll go
countryCode = country.getCountryCode.
So as I said, you'll often see
nested checks for nulls like this.
In Kotlin, we could write this in one line of code,
because of the safety operator.
So let's go back to Kotlin,
once again I'm gonna get errors,
because I haven't defined all these classes,
but we could do something like
val countryCode =,
oh, actually, let's make that a string,
and the string might be null.
And we'll say, = bankBranch,
and then we'll use the safety operator
'cause bankBranch can be null
and then address, and we'll use the safety operator
because address can be null,
country, and we'll use the safety operator
'cause country can be null,
and then finally countryCode.
So you could potentially have this one line of code,
which is shorthand for all of this code
that we have to write in Java,
because remember that every time we use a safety operator
under the covers, it's saying is
whatever's in front of me null.
And if it is, evaluate to null,
otherwise go here, go here, go here.
Now when it evaluates to null,
this isn't gonna cause a null pointer exception,
because the safety operator is smart enough at that point
that this whole thing is not gonna be executed.
Remember, once you hit the safety operator,
it's not gonna keep evaluating the expression
if this is null, it's just gonna return null.
So it's gonna basically short circuit everything here
and you're not gonna get a null pointer exception.
So, the point of all of this
is that you can replace all the null checks
with the safe call operator,
and you can string safe call operators together,
and the moment one of the operators evaluates to null,
the expression will evaluate to null.
Now Kotlin goes a step further than this,
if you can believe it.
So let's say that we want to assign a default countryCode
if any of the variables is null,
so if at any point along here,
any of these safe call operators evaluates to null,
we wanna actually assign a value to countryCode,
we don't want null assigned to countryCode,
so can we do that, yes we can.
We'd use something called the Elvis operator.
The Elvis operator is a question mark followed by a colon.
So the Elvis operator looks like this.
This is the Elvis operator.
Now apparently it's called the Elvis operator because
the Kotlin team, or at least somebody on the Kotlin team,
thinks that this operator looks kind of like Elvis.
More specifically,
Elvis's hair when it's tipped on its side,
so if you can imagine this being tipped clockwise.
So here, I guess, are his eyes,
and this would be his hair.
Now I went out to look at a photo of Elvis
and I'll show you a few photos now.
Let's go out to the browser.
Okay, so here I've found a photo of Elvis.
Now, I'm not sure about the Elvis operator
looking like Elvis, so if these are his eyes,
I guess, I don't know, the question mark maybe,
maybe if he's facing the other way.
Supposed to look like his hair.
Well I guess in a way it does,
I mean his hair tends to be bigger here,
if we look at the photo,
so maybe that's what they mean by it.
But personally I think it's a stretch,
but maybe you're looking at this and going,
yes, yes, I can see that it looks like the Elvis operator.
I think all we can conclude from this
is that somebody in the Kotlin team
really is a big fan of Elvis
and maybe sees Elvis everywhere, I don't know.
Anyway, I just thought I'd show you the background
behind the Elvis operator.
Let's go back to IntelliJ.
Okay, so what does the Elvis operator do?
Well, it lets you assign a default value
when an expression evaluates to null.
So let's take a look at an example,
I'm gonna get rid of all this stuff here.
So we'll say val str2,
and then we'll go str, and we'll use the Elvis operator,
and we'll say this is the default value.
So what's happening here is we're saying
we know that str might be null,
because it's a nullable type.
So we're saying here that we want to assign str to str2,
however, if str is null,
then go ahead instead and define this string.
And you'll notice that we haven't declared a type here.
This is actually String, not nullable,
and if we explicitly add that
we'll see that we don't get a compiler error.
So the compiler knows that this cannot be null,
we can't be assigning null from this statement
because we're using the Elvis operator
and we're assigning a default value when str is null.
Now of course we don't have to put String here,
because the compiler can infer it,
but I wanted to show you that this is not a nullable type.
It could be a nullable type, but it doesn't have to be.
And in fact, you wouldn't want it to be
because best practise in Kotlin
is not to declare nullable types
unless you absolutely have to.
Okay, so let's print str2, because we know str is null.
I'm gonna delete this
code here so that it doesn't get uppercased.
And let's go ahead and print str2.
We'll run,
and we'll see that we get errors
because we've got errors in the Java
and it's going to try compiling our entire project,
so I'll get rid of all this stuff as well.
Go back here, and we'll try running again.
And we'll see what happens when we do this null
from what we were printing up here,
but then for our second println,
we get this is the default value,
because str was null and we were using the Elvis operator,
and so when this is null,
instead the default value is used
and is assigned to str2.
So this is a great way of preventing nulls
from ever being assigned, just use the Elvis operator.
So the Elvis operator is basically shorthand
for the following code.
It's shorthand for if str equals null,
then str2 equals this is the default value.
Else,
and str2 equals str.
Yes, that's because val can't be reassigned,
so just ignore this error.
And so this is what the Elvis operator is actually doing.
Once again, Kotlin wants to be concise,
and so it's given us a nice shorthand for this.
Now if you remember that huge long chain we had
where we had val whatever equals,
what was it, bankBranch.
Safety operator, address,
safety operator, country,
I'll just stop there for now.
Well if you're wondering
if we can use the Elvis operator at the end of this,
we actually can, we can do the following.
So,
once again, if you don't want a null assigned,
you can use the Elvis operator
at the end of a chain like this,
and say, okay, if all of these turn out to be null,
or one of them does, what you're essentially doing here
is you're trying to get the country.
So what you're saying is,
if this gets short circuited along the way
because one of these two guys is null,
or this guy is null, than just assign US.
So you can imagine how useful the safe call operator
and the Elvis operators are.
You don't need any of those
nested blocks of null checks anymore.
You can use the safe call operator
and the Elvis operator, and prevent null pointer exceptions.
Okay, this is a good spot to mention safe casting again,
because safe casting is sort of along the same lines
as the safe call operator.
In one case Kotlin's trying to prevent
null pointer exceptions, and in the other case,
you're casting, you're checking whether something
is an instance of a particular class,
because you're trying to prevent a class cast exception.
So once again, Kotlin has a shorthand for that.
We can use the as question mark operator.
You can say val something of type any
is an arrayOf (1, 2, 3, 4).
And then we can do something like this,
val str3
= something as? String,
and then we can say println(str3).
So what we're trying to do here is we're
trying to cast an array of int to a String,
so obviously that's not going to work.
But when we run, and we'll run now,
I'll have to comment out this line
so that we don't get an error.
You'll see that we don't get an exception here
when we try to do this assignment.
Instead, as you might have guessed, we get a null.
And so just like the safe call operator,
if you use the safe cast operator,
and it turns out that you can't
perform the cast successfully, the cast evaluates to null.
So what's interesting about this is
once you've used the safe cast operator,
from that point on, you have to use the safe call operator.
In other words, if here,
we try to explicitly type this to String,
we're gonna get an error,
because the compiler knows that this might evaluate to null.
And so we'll get a type mismatch saying that
it's requiring a String on the left hand side,
but we have a String question mark,
a nullable string on the right hand side.
And so just keep that in mind
if you're going to use the safe cast operator
rather than doing safe casting,
you're gonna end up in this situation
where from that point forward,
whatever you're assigning to has to be nullable.
And so if we wanted to do something with this String,
we'd have to do the following,
str3?.toUpperCase, let's say.
And of course, we have to remove this.
If we put String? here,
that would take away the error,
but the compiler can infer it, so we don't need it.
If we print this out,
and then run.
I'm sure you, or hopefully you know by now
that we'll get null, because the safe call operator,
when it's the variable it's attached to is null,
the expression evaluates to null.
Okay, I'm gonna end the video here,
and we're gonna continue talking about null references
in the next video, see you there.